It was made in secret,
hidden in the lining of a jacket,
and then smuggled out of the country.
What was it?
A recording
of brothers and sisters in Siberia
singing Kingdom songs.
They sent it from one side
of the earth to the other
to be played at the 1958
international convention in New York
for an audience of more than 250,000 people.
Why is singing so important
to Jehovah’s Witnesses?
Let’s find out in this episode
of Our History in Motion.
Jehovah’s worshippers
have long praised him with song.
But how did singing become
a part of our modern-day worship?
The story begins more than 150 years ago.
The year is about 1869
in Allegheny, Pennsylvania, U.S.A.
Charles Taze Russell
is a young man
searching for Scriptural truth.
One evening he’s walking along
and hears something
—singing coming from a religious meeting
being held in a basement.
He goes in, and what he hears sparks a fire
for Bible study like never before.
Later, Russell and his associates
make music’s role in pure worship clear
as they rediscover Bible truth.
Charles Taze Russell
may have come to appreciate
how the power of music can stir emotions
from a music business
that his father owned for a period of time.
He believed that “the singing of the truth
“is a good way to get it into the heads
and hearts of God’s people.”
The first issue of Zion’s Watch Tower,
published in July of 1879,
announced a songbook
—the first of many to come.
It was called Songs of the Bride.
It contained 144 hymns,
or religious songs of praise.
The Bible Students sang
at their meetings and assemblies.
What was it like to sing
these songs back in the early 1900’s?
Imagine that you’re
at one of Charles Taze Russell’s lectures.
As you walk in,
you’re handed a small sheet of paper.
You look for a seat, but it’s packed.
As the crowd quiets down,
they announce that the meeting
will start with a song and prayer.
In a church,
you expect to find a hymn book in your pew,
but this is a rented hall.
Then you realize
that the paper you were handed
has the song lyrics,
and it also has a place
to leave your name and address
if you’d like a Bible study.
So when the audience
starts to sing, you join in.
What did songs sound like back then?
Let’s listen to a song
we sang for over eight decades.
Here’s a recording from 1916.
That’s a little different than how
our songs sound today.
Compare different versions of this song,
and you’ll notice that the lyrics
and theme changed over the years.
Here’s a version of “All Hail”
by the Watch Tower Male Quartet in 1935.
In our first songbook this song was called
“All Hail the Power of Jesus’ Name,”
which was about, well,
the power of Jesus’ name
with zero mention of Jehovah.
You see, many songs prior to this
were adapted from existing church hymns.
Now here’s the same song in 1950.
Instead of the lyrics
overemphasizing Jesus’ name,
the lyrics refer to “making known God’s will”
and mention Jehovah by name.
Why all the changes?
Because our songs reflect
our current understanding
of Scriptural truth.
As the light gets brighter,
we understand the truth more clearly,
so the songs change.
Our first songbook explained
explained the goal to publish
“songs free from objectionable theology,”
and it’s been the case ever since.
We don’t hold on to songs
for tradition or nostalgia.
We sing them because it’s the truth!
From the 1928 songbook onward,
there was a big shift.
Many songs were written
by our brothers and sisters.
They put more emphasis on Jehovah’s name,
his attributes, and his Kingdom.
You can even tell by the title
Songs of Praise to Jehovah.
Some of the songs might even sound familiar,
like this one.
Are your parents in the truth?
your grandparents?
even your great-grandparents?
If so, they sang the same song as you
at their meetings and assemblies.
That’s a real legacy!
Let’s fast-forward to the 1940’s.
Some of our brothers
were imprisoned for their faith.
The world was at war and needed good news.
So we intensified
our preaching and teaching work.
This is when
the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead
and the Theocratic Ministry School started,
and it’s also when
singing was reintroduced at our meetings.
Wait a minute!
Reintroduced?
That means we stopped singing at meetings.
When?
Find out in the next episode
of Our History in Motion.